---
title: Creating a creative pocket dimension
tags: personal creativity
category: methodologies
published: true
---

I often find myself in want of a dedicated, inspiring and well decorated room,
dedicated solely to any creative business I seek to apply myself to at the given
hour. Sadly, such luxury is rarely practical. This is the space part of my dilemma.

I am often inspired to challenge myself, and to accomplish, to do, but the sad
reality is that most of the time I end up mired in day-to-day routines, minor
everyday jobs and the tedious need to keep track of all my todo lists. This is
the time part.

What I need, is a separation of time and space which can support my creative urges.
Something that, at least mentally, represents a separation from the ordinary of
my life - a pocket dimension.

To solve my dilemma I propose the following techniques, which I hope may
help me repeatedly create a pocket dimension in time and space.

Good luck ^_^

## Helpful tips for getting your creative groove on

### Lo-fi music

Music or sounds can be a gateway to elsewhere inside the mind. Be wary though,
it can take you to many places. I find that the somewhat unrecognized genre of
low-fidelity music works wonders for me. I would describe it as a kind of
structured white-noise. It helps distracting the 'monkey brain' from ruining
your focus.

One of my favorite numbers is ['Raining in Osaka'](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YOJsKatW-T).

### An inspiring and clutter free environment

Something that can scare away any and all kinds of muses, you might want to
attract, a cluttered work desk brimming with all the reminders of the other
stuff you really need to do. The computer is just of to the side promising fun
and distractions, just a click away from Facebook, YouTube, Imgur, emails or the
newest Steam download.

Do I find myself at a time where it's difficult to concentrate, I'll first look
at my table and surroundings. It might be worthwhile to spend my precious time
clearing it up, often I find just a sliver of time to begin something, and much
easier to continue the groove next time I revisit.

I have also bought an old, cheap laptop. It's easy to bring with me and move at
will. It's set up to deny most of my casual online procrastinations, it does not
have any games installed and most importantly, I try to train myself to see it
as a sort-of typewriter, a tool not meant for entertainment but for purpose.

Finally, I take care to pick a spot free of distractions, be it the cleared
living room table, a random cafe, on a bench in the garden or the local park.
Make sure to bring only the necessities. Having aforementioned typewriter,
allows me to escape the house and still be reasonable productive if the tasks at
hand require a text editor or browser.

### Take your time

A pocket dimension can exist for just one hour or much longer, the important
part is that you stay in it until you leave. It will not work if you switch,
everything will break and your creative energy will leak as water from a broken
boat (lol, didn't think that metaphor through).

Sometimes it's difficult to begin too, to just get started. I like to use an
hourglass, turn it and tell myself, I can sit and stare at this stupid paper, at
least until the time runs out. It often works, out of boredom I usually end up
actually doing something productive.

### Know when you're beat

I often create my pocket dimensions in evenings or nights, even at caf√©s. Rainy
days are some of the best. There's nothing wrong trying to go for a setting you
find encouraging, cozy or what ever works for you.

On the other hand, sometimes it just doesn't work. When I recognize this, which
I do manage to do sometimes, I tend to try and pave the way for future
inspirations. You can do this as previously mentioned, by clearing the clutter
from your environment, finding inspiration online, or just buying groceries,
whatever that might give you a couple of surplus points that can later be spent
doing something later, or another day.

### Prioritize

Typically, I have a long list or even lists of what I want to spend time on,
sketching, writing, coding, gardening, planning, arranging, you name it. Each
subject can have many subcategories too. The switching is what will break you.
I'd advise pick something, anything, even at random, and then stop considering
the alternatives. If you do switch, do not go back. Let your focus flow ever
forward until you leave the dimension.

It is okay to bring the prerequisites for working on a small number of different
projects,, it can be beneficial to depending on your time frame. The important
part is to be careful of not trying to do so much that you end up not doing
anything.

The important bit is to limit the noise, and your choices, aim to make your task
simple and easy to begin, let the real challenge be in your mind instead of what
to do first.

### Flow

If you really hit it off, you'll get into a flow. Time ceases to exist and you
just release everything you have into your focus. It's a wonderful experience.
Take heed to stop before you burn out, some of the best projects occur when you
leave a cliffhanger and a feeling that you just can't wait to get back to
'work'.

![Raining in Osaka](/assets/raining-in-osaka.jpg "Raining in Osaka")